So, before we start the formal part of the
course, I would like to discuss a few examples
to motivate the kind of problems we will be
looking at.
So, we start with a problem of air travel.
So, we have an airline; Barbet airlines, which
serves several cities in the country.
And of course, although it serves several
cities, it does not really connect all these
cities directly.
Only some of the cities are connected by direct
flights.
And for other pairs of cities you have to
take a hopping flight.
You have to go via an intermediate city.
So, our first goal maybe to compute every
pair of cities, which are actually connected
by this network served by this airline.
So, how do we find out all pairs of cities
A, B, such that A and B are connected by a
sequence of flights.
So, first we need to look at the network.
So, this is a typical way that we might find
the network.
For example, if we open the in-flight magazine
of an airline, you find a route map.
And it is written like this.
You have a physical map of the country and
you have the cities which are served; marked
out.
There are about ten cities; Delhi, Varanasi,
Ahmedabad, down to Trivandrum in the south.
And you have some arrows indicating the flights.
Now, some of these flights are in one direction.
You can go from Delhi to Varanasi, but you
cannot come back directly to Delhi.
You must go to Ahmedabad and then come back.
So, this is quite common.
If you look at airline's schedules in airlines,
you will find that there were these kind of
triangular routes.
Where you go around a triangle and you cannot
go back directly without hopping in between.
Some pairs of important cities; like in this
case Mumbai and Delhi might be connected by
flights in both directions or even Mumbai
and Calcutta.
And so now we have these ten cities.
We want to know is it really possible go from
say Varanasi to Trivandrum or is it not possible,
is it possible to go from Hyderabad to Delhi
or is it not possible.
So, our first step is to model this problem
in such a way that we retain the essential
details, which are relevant to solving the
problem and get rid of all the unnecessary
details.
So, in this case what we really would like
to know is the structure of this network.
Right.
So, the map itself is not relevant.
We just need to know how many cities are there,
which are on the network and how are they
connected by the flights.
So, the picture below which has these gray
circles and arrows represents this network.
The cities are the gray circles and the flights
are the arrows and the arrow heads indicates
the direction.
So, if there is an arrow head in one direction,
it is a one directional flight; if there is
an arrow head in both ends, its means it is
a bidirectional flight.
The actual names of the cities are not so
relevant.
So, we can call them 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 or a, b,
c, d, e or whatever and solve the problem.
So, this kind of a picture is called a graph.
We will study graphs more formally when we
come to this module in our course.
But a graph is just a picture of this kind.
So it has some nodes, these dots and edges.
So, now one nice thing about moving to this
abstract level is that the actual picture
can be distorted without changing its meaning.
So, we can move.
For instance, if we look at this city here,
right, we can move it to the right and it
does not make any difference in terms of solving
the problem.
Or we could simplify the picture by moving,
for instance, this edge outside, so that we
get no crossing edges.
And this is again the same picture.
Though it looks quite different from the picture
that we started with, this is again the same
network.
Now, in some situations it is useful to realize
that the graph that we have looks like this;
that there are no crossing edges.
Technically, such a graph is called a planar
graph.
It can be drawn on a flat piece of paper without
any edges crossing.
For planar graphs, we might have better algorithms
than for arbitrary graphs.
Now what do you want to do with such a graph?
So, in this case we want to compute what we
call a path.
That is the sequence of edges going from one
city to another city; where of course the
direction must be correct.
So, you cannot go backwards, across an edge
which is flying from A to B. You cannot take
this flight from B to A, unless there is another
flight.
So, our first question is how do we take this
picture and put it into form that we can manipulate
using a program or an algorithm.
So, we need a suitable data structure in order
to represent this graph.
Now given the way we represent the graph,
we need to manipulate it to answer the question
at hand.
In this case, connectivity.
How do we go from A to B or can we go from
A to B or which all cities B can I reach from
A?
So, how do we design such an algorithm, given
the way we have represented the cities in
this graph?
Does it depends on the representation, are
there multiple representations, some of which
gives us more or less efficient algorithm?
These are all questions that we need to answer
before we can decide on whether we have got
the best solution at hand.
Now, in terms of efficiency we have to look
at what are the things that determine the
complexity of a problem.
It is fairly obvious in this particular case
that if we have more cities, the problem is
more complicated.
So the number of cities, which we can call
N, is certainly one parameter which determines
how complicated the algorithm is going to
be, or not how complicated the algorithm is
going to be, or rather how long it is going
to take to run.
The other question which determines how complex
the network is is how many direct flights
there are...
Obviously if there are fewer flights, there
are fewer places, which can be connected and
we have to explore fewer possibilities.
So from this, it follows that computing the
paths depends on both N and F. So, we will
not have an algorithm which will always take
say twenty steps.
It will have to depend some number of steps
depending on N and F. Now what is this dependency,
how does it grow?
If N doubles, does our algorithm take two
times more time?
Does it takes four times more time?
If N term grows to factor of ten, does it
takes ten times more or hundred times more
time?
The other question related to this is given
this dependency on N and F what realistic
size of networks can we handle?
If the airline grows to twenty flights, we
will still have be able to give our answer
in a reasonable time.
Remember that this kind of an answer is typically
required when somebody is making an online
booking or something.
And you will want a reply in a few seconds,
right, it is not enough to come back after
an hour and say “yes, there is a flight
from Trivandrum to Calcutta”.
So, what is the limit of our efficiency?
Can we scale this algorithm to cover airlines,
multiple airlines?
So, we have a website which actually says,
across all airlines I can take you from place
A to place B. That depends on how larger a
value of N and F we can handle.
And then of course the problem that we have
looked at is a very simple problem; can I
get from A to B. But very often it is not
good enough to get from A to B. You want to
get from A to B within some reasonable time
frame.
For instance, it is not usually acceptable
to break journey overnight on aircraft.
At the same time, you also do not want to
spend more than the certain amount of time
waiting in between flights.
So, there are only some connections.
Although there may be; theoretically there
may be the connections, only some of them
may actually be feasible.
So, now our problem becomes a little more
constrained.
So, we do not just want to look at the connected
paths from A to B. But connected paths A to
B, which meet some additional constraints
in terms of timing and other things.
So, can we solve this problem with the same
approach that we solve the simpler problem
or do we need to take a radically different
approach or do we need more information in
order to decide or solve the problem.
Suppose, as you would expect each sector on
this thing has a cost.
As a passenger, the cost would be the price
of ticket.
So, if you are trying to compute the best
way to go from A to B, your motivation might
be to choose the cheapest route in terms of
the ticket cost.
Of course cost is not only money, cost could
be time as well.
You might also want the quickest route from
A to B, the one which involves the least waiting.
So, it depends on what your priority is.
Are you urgently required somewhere, in which
case you do not mind paying more.
Or, are you going on a vacation with the family;
in which case, you have a relaxed time schedule,
but you want to make sure you get value from
money.
From the airlines point of view there may
be other questions.
Periodically aircrafts have to be brought
down for a day for maintenance.
Now, you do not want to have so many aircrafts
that you keep all the routes flying and wastefully
keep planes unused.
At the same time if you keep two few planes,
then when you bring an aircraft down for maintenance
you have to sacrifice some routes.
Now, which routes should you sacrifice?
So that, you ensure that the connectivity
of the network remains the same.
If you could go earlier from Trivandrum to
Calcutta, during a maintenance shutdown you
should still be able to go from Trivandrum
to Calcutta; maybe by a different route.
So, this is a problem to be addressed by the
airlines staff; whereas the cheapest route
might be a problem to be addressed by the
customers.
So, there are very many different kinds of
questions you can ask about this basic air
network that we have described using a graph.
And we will see answers to some of these problems
in this course.